DOT/FAA/TC-16/24 

Federal Aviation Administration 
William J. Hughes Technical Center 
Aviation Research Division 
Atlantic City International Airport 
New Jersey 08405 

Abusive Testing of Proton 
Exchange Membrane Hydrogen 
Fuel Cells 

October 2016 

Final Report 

This document is available to the U.S. public 
through the National Technical Information 
Services (NTIS), Springfield, Virginia 22161. 

This document is also available from the 
Federal Aviation Administration William J. Hughes 
Technical Center at actlibrary.tc.faa.gov. 

U.S. Department of Transportation 
Federal Aviation Administration 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTICE 

This  document  is  disseminated  under  the  sponsorship  of  the  U.S. 
Department of Transportation in the interest of information exchange. The 
U.S. Government assumes no liability for the contents or use thereof. The 
U.S.  Government  does  not  endorse  products  or  manufacturers.  Trade  or 
manufacturers’ names appear herein solely because they are considered 
essential  to  the  objective  of  this  report.  The  findings  and  conclusions  in 
this report are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the 
views  of  the  funding  agency.  This  document  does  not  constitute  FAA 
policy.  Consult  the  FAA  sponsoring  organization  listed  on  the  Technical 
Documentation page as to its use. 

This  report  is  available  at  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration  William  J. 
Hughes  Technical  Center’s  Full-Text  Technical  Reports  page:  
actlibrary.tc.faa.gov in Adobe Acrobat portable document format (PDF). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Report No.

2. Government Accession No.

3. Recipient's Catalog No.

Technical Report Documentation Page 

DOT/FAA/TC-16/24 

4. Title and Subtitle 

5. Report Date

ABUSIVE  TESTING  OF  PROTON  EXCHANGE  MEMBRANE  HYDROGEN 
FUEL CELLS 

October 2016 
6. Performing Organization Code

7. Author(s)

Steven M. Summer1 and Shane Nicholson2
9. Performing Organization Name and Address 

8. Performing Organization Report No.

10. Work Unit No. (TRAIS)

1Federal Aviation Administration 
William J. Hughes Technical Center 
Aviation Research Division 
Fire Safety Branch, ANG-E21 
Atlantic City International Airport, NJ 08405 

2Parker Hannifin Corporation 
Aerospace Group 
Central Engineering FDC 
6500 West Freeway, Suite 1010 
Fort Worth, TX 76116 

11. Contract or Grant No.

12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address 

13. Type of Report and Period Covered

FAA Northwest Mountain Regional Transport Airplane Directorate 
1601 Lind Ave SW 
Renton, WA 98057 

Final Report 

14. Sponsoring Agency Code

ANM-111

15. Supplementary Notes

16. Abstract

In collaboration with Parker Hannifin Corporation, the Fire Safety Branch of the FAA conducted testing to evaluate the effects of 
three  potential  failure  conditions  of  hydrogen  proton  exchange  (or  polymer  electrolyte)  membrane  fuel  cell  stacks  supplied  by 
Nuvera Fuel Cells. The three conditions examined were a loss of coolant to the stack, short circuit, and a crossflow condition. The 
testing showed that the stacks were extremely robust under a variety of failure conditions and that, with proper monitoring of key 
variables, the failures could have been detected and flow of reactant gases stopped prior to any hazardous effects occurring.  

It  is  recommended  that  any  installation  of  a  hydrogen  fuel  cell  system  ensure  that  reactant  supply  gas  pressures,  stack 
temperatures,  coolant  temperatures,  and  stack  electrical  load  characteristics  be  adequately  monitored  and  connected  to  system 
shutdown features. In addition, provisions should be made so that the surrounding environment is monitored for any temperature 
or hydrogen gas concentration increases. 

17. Key Words 

18. Distribution Statement

Hydrogen, Fuel cell, Proton exchange membrane, PEM 

This  document  is  available  to  the  U.S.  public  through  the 
National  Technical  Information  Service  (NTIS),  Springfield, 
Virginia  22161.  This  document  is  also  available  from  the 
Federal  Aviation  Administration  William  J.  Hughes  Technical 
Center at actlibrary.tc.faa.gov. 

21. No. of Pages

22. Price

19. Security Classif. (of this report) 

Unclassified

Form DOT F 1700.7 (8-72) 

20. Security Classif. (of this page) 

Unclassified

34

Reproduction of completed page authorized

 
 
vii 

1 

1 
2 

2 

4 
5 
6 
6 
7 
7 

7 

7 
7 
8 

8 

8 
15 
18 
23 

25 

26 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

1.1 
1.2 

Background 
Scope of Experiments 

2. 

EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS 

2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
2.6 

Fuel Cell Stacks 
Anode and Cathode Gas Supply 
Coolant Supply 
Load Bank 
Temperature Measurement 
Gas Measurement 

3. 

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES 

3.1 
3.2 
3.3 

Loss of Coolant Test 
Short-Circuit Test 
Crossflow Test 

4. 

DISCUSSION OF RESULTS 

4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 

Loss of Coolant Test 
Short-Circuit Test 
Crossflow Condition Test 
Additional Data—Hydrogen Leakage 

5. 

6. 

CONCLUSIONS 

REFERENCES 

iii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 

Page 

LIST OF FIGURES 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

Diagram of a typical proton exchange membrane fuel cell 

Pressure vessel located at the FAA’s pressure fire modeling facility 

Schematic of overall test setup 

Photograph of experimental setup 

Photograph of fuel cell stack as used in experiments 

Photograph showing placement of surface thermocouples on fuel cell stack 

Photograph of the load bank installed for testing 

Loss of coolant test–reactant gas pressures and stack voltage/current 

Loss of coolant test–stack surface temperatures 

Loss of coolant test–coolant supply and exit temperatures 

Loss of coolant test–pressure vessel temperatures 

Loss of coolant test—still-frame photograph from test video during thermal event 

Loss of coolant test—post-test photograph of damaged area 

Loss of coolant test—post-test photograph of cathode inlet port with gas manifold 
removed 

Loss of coolant test—photograph taken during post-test teardown of MEA active  
area damage 

Loss of coolant test—photograph taken during post-test teardown of cathode inlet  
port damage 

Short-circuit test–reactant gas pressures and stack voltage/current 

Short-circuit test–stack surface temperatures 

Short-circuit test–coolant supply and exit temperatures 

Crossflow condition test–reactant gas pressures and stack voltage/current 

Crossflow condition test–stack surface temperatures 

Crossflow condition test–coolant supply and exit temperatures 

Crossflow condition test–pressure vessel temperatures 

Crossflow condition test–hydrogen concentration 

Crossflow condition test–external damage at O2 outlet port 

Crossflow condition test–external damage at O2 inlet ports 

Crossflow condition test–internal damage to fuel cell stack 

Hydrogen leakage–reactant gas pressures and stack voltage/current 

iv 

2 

3 

3 

4 

5 

5 

6 

8 

9 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

16 

17 

18 

19 

19 

20 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

 
 
29 

30 

Hydrogen leakage–stack surface temperatures 

Hydrogen leakage–hydrogen concentration 

24 

25 

v 

 
 
 
 
LIST OF ACRONYMS 

ARC 
DAS 
ODA 
MEA 
PEM 
THC 

Aviation Rulemaking Committee 
Data acquisition system 
Oxygen-depleted air 
Membrane electrode assembly 
Proton exchange (or polymer electrolyte) membrane 
Total hydrocarbon 

vi 

 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Driven by increasingly stringent environmental regulations, the aviation community is exploring 
new  integrated  and  greener  technologies  to  satisfy  aircraft  power  and  electrical  needs.  
Hydrogen-based fuel cells are one such technology that is attractive to the aviation community 
because  of  their  high  power  output,  efficiency,  and  environmental  friendliness  as  compared  to 
fossil  fuels.  The  aviation  industry  has  been  evaluating  and  developing  prototypes  to  support  a 
variety of operations onboard the aircraft. These operations range from replacing the airplane’s 
main  battery,  ram  air  turbine,  or  even  the  auxiliary  power  unit  to  supplying  power  to  galley 
cooking  equipment.  In  addition  to  the  electrical  power  supply,  industry  is  evaluating  potential 
ways to use the byproducts of hydrogen-based fuel cells, water, and oxygen-depleted air. These 
byproducts could be used for fuel tank inerting, cargo bay fire suppression, or water supply. 

In collaboration with Parker Hannifin Corporation, the Fire Safety Branch of the FAA conducted 
testing to evaluate the effects of three potential failure conditions of hydrogen proton exchange 
(or  polymer  electrolyte)  membrane  fuel  cell  stacks  supplied  by  Nuvera  Fuel  Cells.  The  three 
conditions examined were a loss of coolant to the stack, short circuit, and a crossflow condition. 
After  exposing  the  stack  to  the  various  failure  conditions,  it  was  observed  that  the  stack 
continued to operate for an extended period of time before any hazardous effects were observed. 
Once the stack components failed, external heat in excess of the normal operational temperature 
was observed; however, only the loss of coolant and crossflow tests resulted in any fire/sparking 
from  the  test  unit.  In  addition,  the  crossflow  condition  test  resulted  in  some  hydrogen  leakage 
into the surrounding pressure vessel. 

There were various opportunities for detection of the failure during the time spanning from when 
the  failure  event  was  initiated  to  when  the  stack  deteriorated  to  the  point  of  flaming/sparking. 
Failure  detection  could  have  been  achieved  by  monitoring  the  reactant  gas  supply  pressures, 
coolant exit temperatures, stack surface temperatures, or the stack output voltage and current. 

The  testing  showed  that  the  stacks  were  extremely  robust  under  a  variety  of  failure  conditions 
and that, with proper monitoring of key variables, the failures could have been detected and flow 
of reactant gases  stopped prior to any hazardous effects  occurring.  It is recommended  that any 
installation  of  a  hydrogen  fuel  cell  system  ensure  that  reactant  supply  gas  pressures,  stack 
temperatures,  coolant  temperatures,  and  stack  electrical  load  characteristics  be  adequately 
monitored and connected to system shutdown features. In addition, provisions should be made so 
that  the  surrounding  environment  is  monitored  for  any  temperature  or  hydrogen  gas 
concentration increases. 

It should be noted that this testing only evaluated failure mechanisms of the fuel cell stack itself. 
The storage and distribution of high-pressure hydrogen gas provides its own level of hazard that 
also  needs  to  be  addressed.  Further  testing  of  other  hydrogen  fuel  cells,  with  a  focus  on  these 
aspects, should be conducted and evaluated prior to any implementation of a fuel cell system to 
ensure that any safety issues are being adequately addressed. 

vii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION 

1.1  BACKGROUND 

Driven by increasingly stringent environmental regulations, the aviation community is exploring 
new  integrated  and  greener  technologies  to  satisfy  aircraft  power  and  electrical  needs.  
Hydrogen-based  fuel  cells,  attractive  to  the  aviation  community  because  of  their  high  power 
output,  efficiency,  and  environmental  friendliness  as  compared  to  fossil  fuels,  are  one  such 
technology.  The  aviation  industry  has  been  evaluating  and  developing  prototypes  to  support  a 
variety of onboard operations. These operations range from replacing the airplane’s main battery, 
ram  air  turbine,  or  even  the  auxiliary  power  unit  to  supplying  power  to  galley  cooking 
equipment. In addition to the electrical power supply, industry is evaluating potential ways to use 
the  byproducts  of  hydrogen-based  fuel  cells,  water,  and  oxygen-depleted  air  (ODA).  These 
byproducts could be used for fuel-tank inerting, cargo bay fire suppressionn, or water supply. 

The  implementation  of  hydrogen-based  fuel  cells  on  commercial  aircraft,  however,  presents  a 
number of safety concerns because of the highly flammable nature of hydrogen gas. Industry has 
been working to address these concerns through a joint European Organization for Civil Aviation 
Equipment/Society of Automotive Engineers committee (AE-7AFC) to develop testing standards 
and  installation  guidance  for  proton  exchange  (or  polymer  electrolyte)  membrane  (PEM)  fuel 
cells.  In  addition,  the  FAA  recently  formed  an  Energy  Storage  Device  Aviation  Rulemaking 
Committee  (ARC)  to,  among  other  things,  determine  the  hazards  and  applicable  airworthiness 
requirements concerning the use of hydrogen-based fuel cells on transport-category aircraft. 

There are several types of hydrogen-based fuel cells, including PEM, alkaline, solid oxide, and 
others. The data generated in this report used a PEM fuel cell stack. PEM fuel cells are the focus 
of the AE-7AFC committee and one of the focal points of the FAA ARC. 

The PEM fuel cell transforms the chemical energy resulting from the electrochemical reaction of 
hydrogen  and  oxygen  into  electrical  energy.  A  diagram  of  a  typical  PEM  membrane  electrode 
assembly (MEA) is shown in figure 1. A fuel cell stack is constructed of multiple layers of these 
MEAs  separated  by  bipolar  plates.  Hydrogen  is  supplied  to  the  anode,  whereas  air,  or  pure 
oxygen, is supplied to the cathode. The hydrogen is separated into protons and electrons through 
a  platinum  catalyst.  The  hydrogen  protons  then  migrate  through  the  PEM  to  the  cathode  side 
while the electrons travel along an external load circuit to the cathode side, thereby generating 
the  current  output  of  the  fuel  cell.  The  oxygen  then  reacts  with  the  hydrogen  protons,  thereby 
generating water, ODA, and heat. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Diagram of a typical proton exchange membrane fuel cell [1] 

Because  of  the  flammable  nature  of  hydrogen,  a  failure  within  the  fuel  cell  could  potentially 
result  in  hazardous  conditions.  Potential  failure  mechanisms  include  a  short  circuit  of  the  fuel 
cell, a crossflow condition in which the anode and cathode react with each other or an overheat 
condition within the fuel cell. 

1.2  SCOPE OF EXPERIMENTS 

The  objective  of  this  study  was  to  evaluate  potential  failure  conditions  within  a  PEM  fuel  cell 
stack. Conditions examined included a short circuit, crossflow, and a loss of coolant event. The 
effects  of  each  failure  and  the  potential  for  indication  prior  to  failure  through  a  variety  of 
measured parameters were examined. 

2.  EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS 

The  experiments  discussed  within  this  report  were  conducted  at  the  FAA  William  J.  Hughes 
Technical Center within the Pressure Fire Modeling Facility. This facility houses a 10-m3 vessel 
capable of withstanding a maximum working pressure of 650 psi. The fuel cell stack, along with 
temperature  and  gas  measurement  probes,  was  situated  inside  this  pressure  vessel.  High-speed 
and infrared cameras were used to record the test events. The fuel cell stack was connected to an 
external load bank and supplied with dry hydrogen and oxygen gases and deionized water as a 
coolant  source.  In  addition,  gas  analyzers  were  used  to  measure  oxygen,  carbon  monoxide, 
carbon  dioxide,  hydrogen,  and  total  hydrocarbon  (THC)  concentration  within  the  pressure 
chamber. Figure 2 is a photograph of the pressure vessel, and figure 3 shows a schematic of the 
overall test setup. Figure 4 is a photograph of the test setup with various items of interest labeled 
for reference. 

2 

 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Pressure vessel located at the FAA’s Pressure Fire Modeling Facility 

P.1

Regulator
RV-01

Manual
MV-01

Solenoid
IV-01

P.2

Regulator
RV-02

Manual
MV-02

Solenoid
IV-02

e
b
u
T
”
¼

e
b
u
T
”
¼

4/0 Cable 
Pair

C.1/C.2 
Current Sensors

FAA Fire Chamber

Camera

T.4

H2

Tank-01

O2

Tank-02

Load 
Resistor

Relay
K1

Relay
K2

Load Resistor

1
0
-
V
P

2
0
-
V
P

Gas 
Purge 
Valves

Bleed Resistor

V.1

T.3

e
b
u
T
”
¼

T.6

Camera

T.5

T.1

IV-03

e
b
u
T
”
8
/
3

IV-04

T.2

3/8” Tube

10 Cell Fuel Cell Stack

Small Coolant Tank
RES-01

Coolant Pump
Pump-01

Figure 3. Schematic of overall test setup 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Photograph of experimental setup 

2.1  FUEL CELL STACKS 

Three fuel cell stacks were used for testing. Figure 5 is a photograph of one of them, as set up for 
testing, and figure 6 shows the placement of the surface thermocouples. These were PEM-type 
fuel cell stacks with metal bipolar plates, consisting of 10 cells with an active area of 250 cm2 
and laboratory-grade configuration hardware. An adapter manifold with silicon gaskets was used 
to interface with the reactant and coolant inputs and outputs of the fuel cell. These fuel cells were 
basic  research  stacks  with  no  protective  covers  or  electrical  isolation,  with  the  manifold  end 
acting  as  the  ground  reference  for  the  stack.  The  opposite  end  of  the  stack  was  electrically 
charged when reactants were present. 

4 

 
 
 
Figure 5. Photograph of fuel cell stack as used in experiments 

Figure 6. Photograph showing placement of surface thermocouples on fuel cell stack 

2.2  ANODE AND CATHODE GAS SUPPLY 

Dry  gases  of  O2  (at  99%  purity)  and  H2  (at  99.999%  purity)  were  supplied  to  the  cathode  and 
anode  sides,  respectively.  Pure  O2  was  used  as  opposed  to  air  on  the  cathode  side  so  as  to 
maximize  the  potential  fire  load;  however,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  fuel  stacks  used  were 

5 

 
 
 
designed for use with air, not pure O2. The gas supply was controlled via manual needle valves 
on  the  outlet  of  the  gas  bottles  to  achieve  the  desired  pressures,  and  electrically  controlled 
solenoid  valves  were  used  to  turn  the  gas  flow  on  and  off  as  needed.  The  reactant  gases  were 
supplied to the test unit through 3/8″ copper tubing. 

2.3  COOLANT SUPPLY 

Coolant flow was supplied to the fuel cell stack through a 1.7 gpm pump connected to a 2-gallon 
supply of deionized water that was recirculated through the system during the test. Control of the 
flow was via a pair of electrically controlled solenoid valves. The coolant was supplied to the test 
unit through 3/8″ stainless steel tubing. 

2.4  LOAD BANK 

The electrical load was applied to the fuel cell using a load bank, shown in figure 7, consisting of 
two  525A  stainless  steel  ribbon  resistors  with  a  resistance  of  0.02  ohms  each.  These  were 
combined in series, providing 0.04 ohms total resistance for the loss of coolant test or in parallel 
to provide 0.01 ohms total resistance for the short-circuit test. 

Current Sensors 

Bleed Resistor 

Load Resistors 

Power Relays 

\ 

Figure 7. Photograph of the load bank installed for testing 

In addition, a smaller bleed resistor was used to keep the fuel cell loaded at 15A during start up 
at  no-load  conditions  so  as  to  prevent  the  unit  from  operating  at  open  circuit  voltage.  This 
resistor was rated at 0.5 ohm, 300W. 

Two relays  were used to direct the  current through  either the  two  ribbon  resistors  or  the bleed 
resistor. Current output was measured through the use of two current sensors, with a range from 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
0–500A  and  accuracy  of  ±0.4%.  Voltage  output  was  measured  directly  through  the  data 
acquisition system (DAS). 

2.5  TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT 

Temperature  measurements  were  recorded  with  1/8″  sheathed  K-type 
thermocouples. 
Measurements  were  taken  of  the  coolant  supply  and  exit temperatures  and  on  each  side  of  the 
fuel cell stack. The stack thermocouples were each placed at the approximate center of the MEA 
stacks on the front, rear, left, and right sides. In addition, five thermocouples situated on existing 
thermocouple trees were used to monitor and record the chamber temperature. 

2.6  GAS MEASUREMENT 

Gas measurements of CO, CO2, O2, H2, and THC were monitored throughout testing. CO, CO2, 
and O2 were all measured with a Rosemount Analytical MLT-4 multi-gas analyzer; an H2scan 
HY-OPTIMA™  2700  and  a  Signal  Instruments  3000HM  analyzer  were  used  for  H2  and  THC 
measurements,  respectively.  THC  samples  were  routed  from  the  pressure  chamber  to  the 
analyzer with heated lines maintained at 200°F so as to ensure there was no condensation of the 
sample prior to reaching the sensor. 

3.  EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES 

Prior to each test, leak checks of the anode and cathode lines were conducted using nitrogen gas. 
In  addition,  leak  checks  of  the  coolant  path  were  conducted.  The  DAS  was  initiated  and  all 
sensors were checked for proper functionality. The coolant flow was initiated and H2 and O2 gas 
bottle  pressures  were  set  at  36.3  and  34.8  psia,  respectively.  With  the  test  article  at  ambient 
temperature conditions, valves were opened to allow the anode and cathode gases to flow. The 
unit was then run at this idle condition for a period of time to ensure proper operation of the fuel 
cell and all measurement apparatuses prior to proceeding with the test conditions. 

3.1  LOSS OF COOLANT TEST 

The load bank relays were closed to move the unit from idle to a power supply condition. This 
produced an approximate 170A load on the fuel cell system. The system was maintained at this 
condition for a period of time before shutting down the flow of coolant to the fuel cell stack. This 
was achieved by turning off the coolant pump and closing the coolant isolation valves. Data and 
video recording were then continued until a failure event occurred. 

3.2  SHORT-CIRCUIT TEST 

Prior  to  the  short-circuit  test,  the  load  bank  was  reconfigured  such  that  the  load  resistors  were 
parallel  with  the  bleed  resistor.  Once  the  test  was  underway,  the  load  bank  relays  were  closed 
when  the  fuel  cell  system  was  operating  at  the  idle  condition,  thereby  inducing  a  load  of 
approximately  470A  on  the  system.  The  system  was  maintained  at  this  condition,  with  data 
collection and video recording continuing until a failure event occurred. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3  CROSSFLOW TEST 

Pretest inspections of the final fuel cell stack verified an internal failure condition within the fuel 
cell stack, which led to a  crossflow condition  whereby  the  H2, once introduced to the fuel cell 
stack,  was  interacting  with  the  O2.  The  stack  was  run  in  its  idle  condition  and  a  short-circuit 
condition to examine any potential failure events resulting from this crossflow condition. 

4.  DISCUSSION OF RESULTS 

Experimental data and results of the post-test teardown analysis of each of the fuel cell stacks are 
provided in this section. On each of the data plots provided, significant events relevant to the test 
are  labeled.  The  various  gas  analysis  probes  did  not  provide  any  substantial  measurements, 
indicating an inconsequential change in quantities of CO, CO2, O2, THC, and H2 for each of the 
tests. As such, the gas analysis data from these experiments are not provided in this report. 

4.1  LOSS OF COOLANT TEST 

Figures  8–11  show  the  results  of  the  loss  of  coolant  test.  Figure  8  shows  a  plot  of  the  stack 
voltage  and  current  along  with  the  supply  H2  and  O2  pressures  for  the  loss  of  coolant  test.  
Figure 9 provides the four stack surface temperatures. Figure 10 shows the coolant supply and 
exit temperatures, and figure 11 shows the temperatures from the two temperature trees installed 
in the pressure vessel.  

Figure 8. Loss of coolant test–reactant gas pressures and stack voltage/current 

8 

 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Loss of coolant test–stack surface temperatures 

Figure 10. Loss of coolant test–coolant supply and exit temperatures 

9 

 
 
 
Figure 11. Loss of coolant test–pressure vessel temperatures 

Once  the  electrical  load  was  placed  on  the  system,  it  was  allowed  to  operate  at  170A  for 
approximately 140 seconds with coolant flow. At this point, the voltage reading was lost because 
of  an  error  in  the  sensor  placement.  This  sensor  placement  was  corrected  for  subsequent  tests. 
Following the initial load application, coolant flow to the unit was stopped by closing the coolant 
isolation  valves  and  disabling  the  coolant  pump.  This  resulted  in  a  slight  increase  in  the  load 
current to approximately 175A for a period of 165 seconds. The current increase and a change in 
the  coolant  exit  temperature  were  noted  almost  immediately  after  coolant  flow  was  stopped. 
Within approximately 1 minute after stopping the coolant flow, an increase in the stack surface 
temperatures was also noted. In addition, at this point, current began to drop and reactant supply 
pressures  were  adjusted  in  an  attempt  to  recover  the  unit.  The  current  was  unable  to  be  fully 
recovered, however, and continued to decline until reaching 0A approximately 500 seconds after 
the coolant flow was stopped. 

Approximately 111 seconds after completely losing current flow, a thermal event occurred, with 
sparks  emanating  from  the  forward-facing  side  of  the  fuel  cell  stack.  This  event  is  shown  in 
figure 12 with a still frame from the recorded video of the test. The event is also shown in figures 
9 and 11 as the forward stack surface temperature rises to over 220°F and all of the temperature 
probes  within  the  pressure  vessel  also  increase.  The  failure  event  was  allowed  to  continue  for 
approximately 1 minute  after the  sparking and flaming  was observed. After this point,  flow of 
the  reactant  gases  was  shut  off  and  the  primary  fire  was  observed  to  self-extinguish  within 
seconds. Burning of the fuel cell stack materials continued for approximately 40 seconds, after 
which time it self-extinguished. 

10 

 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Loss of coolant test—still-frame photograph from test video during thermal 
event 

Figures 13 and 14 are photographs of the unit after removal from the test fixture. Figure 13 is an 
external  view  of  the  forward  side  of  the  unit;  it  shows  signs  of  severe  damage  to  the  O2  inlet 
section of the stack. Figure 14 is a photograph, looking downward into the O2 inlet port, with the 
gas manifold removed. 

11 

 
 
 
Figure 13. Loss of coolant test—post-test photograph of damaged area 

12 

 
 
 
Figure 14. Loss of coolant test—post-test photograph of cathode inlet port with gas 
manifold removed 

A post-test teardown of the fuel cell stack, conducted by the manufacturer, revealed two distinct 
areas  of  damage.  One,  shown  in  figure  15,  was  situated  between  the  active  cell  area  at  the 
oxidant and coolant inlet. This effectively was a hot spot where burning occurred on the active 
area  of  the  bipolar  metal  plate.  Damage  was  noted  through  the  discoloration  of  the  plate  and 
fusing  of  the  gasket  material  to  the  active  area.  The  damage  caused  by  this  was  most  severe  
(i.e., largest damage area) toward the center of the stack and smaller toward the end cells. The 
burning caused by the failure in this area appeared to be caused by shorting of the plates and was 
isolated to the active area of the plates. 

13 

 
 
 
Figure 15. Loss of coolant test—photograph taken during post-test teardown of MEA 
active area damage (photograph intentionally blurred to protect proprietary information) 

The second area of damage occurred outside of the active cell area between the anode outlet and 
the cathode inlet manifolds. This is the damage that was noted on the external photographs (see 
figures 13 and 14) immediately following the test. The post-test analysis showed that there was a 
fire  at  the  cathode  inlet  that  consumed  the  gasket  material  and  a  portion  of  the  stainless  steel 
plates in this area. This fire breached the anode outlet, allowing H2 to continue to feed the fire. 
Figure 16 shows a close-up photograph of this area during the post-test disassembly of the fuel 
cell stack. 

14 

 
 
 
Figure 16. Loss of coolant test—photograph taken during post-test teardown of cathode 
inlet port damage (photograph intentionally blurred to protect proprietary information) 

4.2  SHORT-CIRCUIT TEST 

Figures  17–19  show  the  results  of  the  short-circuit  test.  Figure  17  shows  a  plot  of  the  stack 
voltage and current along with the supply H2 and O2 pressures for the loss of coolant test. Figure 
18 shows the four stack  surface temperatures, and figure 19 shows the coolant supply and exit 
temperatures.  The  temperature  probes  placed  within  the  pressure  vessel  did  not  record  any 
significant  temperature  events  and,  therefore,  data  from  these  probes  are  not  provided  in  this 
report. 

15 

 
 
 
Figure 17. Short-circuit test–reactant gas pressures and stack voltage/current 

Figure 18. Short-circuit test–stack surface temperatures 

16 

 
 
 
Figure 19. Short-circuit test–coolant supply and exit temperatures 

The stack was run at the idle condition with a 15A load for a period of time before applying the 
short-circuit  condition.  Once  applied,  a  peak  current  of  470A  (235A/sensor)  was  observed  for 
approximately  10  seconds.  The  voltage  and  current  then  began  to  drop  significantly  until 
reaching approximately 200A. At this point, the short-circuit condition was temporarily removed 
and gas pressures were adjusted in an attempt to recover full operation of the system. The current 
continued  to  drop  during  this  duration  and,  approximately  100  seconds  later,  the  short-circuit 
load  was  again  applied.  The  stack  was  operated  for  nearly  12  minutes  in  this  condition  and, 
though  the  electrical  capacity  of  the  fuel  cell  continued  to  deteriorate,  there  were  no  observed 
conditions indicating a stack fire or hydrogen leakage in the chamber. 

Temperature  increases  of  the  stack  surfaces  and  coolant  exit  are  shown  in  figures  18  and  19, 
respectively. These increases could be observed during the test as steam exiting the stack through 
the coolant exhaust ports located on top of the stack. 

A post-test examination of the fuel cell stack showed little to no damage to the stack; however, 
during  the  post-test  teardown  of  the  stack,  it  showed  significant  internal  damage.  All  of  the 
MEAs  were  damaged,  and  some  sections  were  destroyed.  In  addition,  further  evidence  of  the 
heat generated within the stack was seen in discolorization of the bipolar plates, damage to the 
gasket materials, and burnt components of the plastic frame surrounding  each layer of the cell. 
The gasket material at both cathode inlet ports failed because of the heat damage, but this was of 
little consequence because the two ports only leaked into each other, causing no further damage. 
The damage to the bipolar plates was most severe toward the center of the stack and decayed in 
size toward the outer cells. 

17 

 
 
 
 
4.3  CROSSFLOW CONDITION TEST 

Figures 20–24 show the results of the crossflow test. Figure 20 shows a plot of the stack voltage 
and current along with the supply H2 and O2 pressures for the crossflow test. Figure 21 shows the 
four stack surface temperatures, figure 22 shows the coolant supply and exit temperatures, and 
figure 23 shows the temperatures from the two temperature trees installed in the pressure vessel. 
Figure 24 shows the H2 data from within the pressure vessel. 

Figure 20. Crossflow condition test–reactant gas pressures and stack voltage/current 

18 

 
 
 
Figure 21. Crossflow condition test–stack surface temperatures 

Figure 22. Crossflow condition test–coolant supply and exit temperatures 

19 

 
 
 
Figure 23. Crossflow condition test–pressure vessel temperatures 

Figure 24. Crossflow condition test–hydrogen concentration 

20 

 
 
 
After supplying the reactant gases to the fuel cell, it is observed in figure 20 that, because of the 
crossover condition, there was initial difficulty in obtaining a constant gas pressure supply to the 
stack. Nevertheless, the stack was able to be operated in its idle condition at a load of 15A for a 
period  of  approximately  5  minutes  without  any  apparent  impact  to  the  resulting  voltage  or 
current  output  of  the  stack.  After  approximately  5  minutes  of  idle  performance,  a  short-circuit 
condition  was  applied  to  the  fuel  cell  stack.  This  resulted  in  a  peak  current  of  521A  for 
approximately  4  seconds.  The  voltage  and  current  then  decayed  until  complete  failure  110 
seconds  later. At the approximate time  of the stack current  reaching  0A, it  is  suspected  the H2 
fire  initiated.  This  suspicion  regarding  the  timing  of  the  H2  fire  is  because  of  the  pressure 
readings  observed  in  figure  20  and  the  slight  stack  surface  temperature  (see  figure  21)  and 
pressure vessel temperature increases (see figure 23) observed at this time. In addition, figure 22 
shows an increase in the coolant exit temperature at this time. Approximately 90 seconds later, a 
visible fire occurred along with the detection of H2 leakage into the pressure vessel. At this point, 
the reactant gases were turned off and the fire rapidly self-extinguished. 

A  post-test  evaluation  of  the  fuel  cell  stack  showed  significant  external  damage.  There  was 
evidence of two distinct damage areas external to the fuel cell stack. The first, shown in figure 
25, was at one of the O2 outlet ports; the other was located at both of the O2 inlet ports, as shown 
in figure 26. 

Figure 25. Crossflow condition test–external damage at O2 outlet port 

21 

 
 
 
 
Figure 26. Crossflow condition test–external damage at O2 inlet ports 

During  a  complete  teardown  analysis  of  the  stack,  significant  internal  damage  was  observed. 
Nine  of  the  ten  cells  were  fused  together,  and  a  large  hole  was  burned  straight  through  the 
MEAS. Again, heavier signs of damage were observed toward the center of the stack. The gasket 
material  and  metal  bipolar  plate  material  between  the  O2  manifold  and  ambient  environment 
were destroyed  by burning.  Though the  damage  was severe,  it still  remained  localized  and did 
not  appear  to  propagate  throughout  the  active  area  of  the  cells.  Photographs  of  the  internal 
damage noted during the teardown analysis are shown in figure 27. 

22 

 
 
 
Figure 27. Crossflow condition test–internal damage to fuel cell stack 

4.4  ADDITIONAL DATA—HYDROGEN LEAKAGE 

During  the  first  attempt  at  conducting  the  short-circuit  condition  test,  there  was  an  accidental 
failure of one of the anode gas connection points. This failure resulted in a hydrogen leak into the 
pressure vessel, which came very close to reaching the lower flammability limit. This constitutes 
another potential failure condition that could lead to hazardous conditions and must be protected 
against. 

Figures 28–30 show the results from this failure condition. Figure 28 shows a plot of the stack 
voltage and  current along with the supply  H2 and  O2 pressures. Figure 29 provides the surface 
temperatures  for  the  four  stacks,  and  figure  30  provides  the  H2  data  from  within  the  pressure 
vessel. 

23 

 
 
 
 
Figure 28. Hydrogen leakage–reactant gas pressures and stack voltage/current 

Figure 29. Hydrogen leakage–stack surface temperatures 

24 

 
 
 
Figure 30. Hydrogen leakage–hydrogen concentration 

Aside from the H2 concentration reading in figure 30, there were several indicators that there was 
a failure condition existing within the stack. Figure 28 shows that the test operators were having 
a difficult time maintaining the reactant gas pressures. In hindsight, it is clear that this was due to 
the  H2  leak  occurring  at  the  time.  In  addition,  stack  surface  temperatures  indicated  a  failure 
condition  long  before  the  leak  was  detected  by  the  gas  analyzer,  with  temperatures  exceeding 
400°F.  There  were,  however,  no  visual  indications  of  any  thermal  event  on  the  HD  or  FLIR 
video. 

5.  CONCLUSIONS 

In collaboration with Parker Hannifin, the Fire Safety Branch of the FAA conducted testing to 
evaluate  the  effects  of  three  potential  failure  conditions  of  hydrogen  proton  exchange  (or 
polymer  electrolyte)  membrane  fuel  cell  stacks  supplied  by  Nuvera  Fuel  Cells.  The  three 
conditions examined were a loss of coolant to the stack, short circuit, and a crossflow condition. 
After  exposing  the  stack  to  the  various  failure  conditions,  it  was  observed  that  the  stack 
continued to operate for an extended period of time before any hazardous effects were observed. 
Because the fuel cell stack was not expected to survive as long as it did, the typical balance of 
plant  to  properly  condition  the  supply  gases  was  not  utilized.  Had  these  gases  been  properly 
conditioned, an increased survivability of the stack would be expected.  

Once the stack components failed, external heat in excess of the normal operational temperature 
was observed; however, only the loss of coolant and crossflow tests resulted in any fire/sparking 

25 

 
 
 
 
from the test unit. The crossflow condition test resulted in hydrogen leakage into the surrounding 
pressure vessel. 

There  were  various  opportunities  for  detection  of  the  failure  during  the  time  from  when  the 
failure  event  was  initiated  to  when  the  stack  deteriorated,  and  finally  when  the  point  of 
flaming/sparking began. Failure detection could have been achieved by monitoring the reactant 
gas supply pressures,  coolant  exit temperatures,  stack surface temperatures, or  the  stack  output 
voltage and current. 

An  additional  failure  mechanism  was  observed  during  testing  when  one  of  the  hydrogen  gas 
connections failed, resulting in a large leak of hydrogen into the surrounding vessel. Though this 
leak approached  the lower  explosive limit,  there  was  ample  opportunity  for  the  failure  to have 
been detected. The failure could have been noted via monitoring of the gas supply pressures or 
stack surface temperatures. 

The  testing  showed  that  the  stacks  were  extremely  robust  under  a  variety  of  failure  conditions 
and that, with proper monitoring of key variables, the failures could have been detected and flow 
of reactant gases  stopped prior to any hazardous effects  occurring.  It is recommended  that any 
installation  of  a  hydrogen  fuel  cell  system  ensure  that  reactant  supply  gas  pressures,  stack 
temperatures,  coolant  temperatures,  and  stack  electrical  load  characteristics  be  adequately 
monitored and connected to system shutdown features. In addition, provisions should be made so 
that  the  surrounding  environment  is  monitored  for  any  temperature  or  hydrogen  gas 
concentration increases. 

It should be noted that this testing only evaluated failure mechanisms of the fuel cell stack itself. 
The storage and distribution of high-pressure hydrogen gas provides its own level of hazard that 
additionally needs to be addressed. Further testing of other hydrogen fuel cells, with a focus on 
these  aspects,  should  be  conducted  and  evaluated  prior  to  any  implementation  of  a  fuel  cell 
system to ensure that all safety issues are adequately addressed. 

6.  REFERENCES 

1. 

“Membrane Electrode Assembly - Electro-Chemical Reaction Diagram,” by 
CFA213FCE - Own work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 via Commons, available at 
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Membrane_Electrode_Assembly_-_Electro-
Chemical_Reaction_Diagram.jpg#/media/File:Membrane_Electrode_Assembly_-
_Electro-Chemical_Reaction_Diagram.jpg (accessed 03/02/16). 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
